Visualizing Trends in the Bundestag
================
Santiago Giordano

### Data

  The data used was compiled from Germany’s Federal Returning Officer’s
website, [Der
Bundeswhalleiter](https://www.bundeswahlleiter.de/en/bundeswahlleiter.html).
Globally, the data has the seat count each party received in every
election since 1949 up until the latest election as of June 2022. For
the visualizations I use two datasets using the same data in slightly
different formats. `bundestag_party_seats` is made up of an election
year variable and one variable for each party which denotes the seat
count in any given election. This dataset is a pivoted version of
`bundestag_election_seats` which has one variable for party and one
variable for each election year (it also includes some descriptive
variables for the parties but these are not as relevant).

## Visualizations

### Party Seat Distribution in the Bundestag since 1949

![](Visualizing-_Bundestag_trends_files/figure-gfm/Bundestag-1.png)<!-- -->

  While this is not necessarily the fanciest line graph, it conveys
quite well the general trends seen in the support for German parties. If
we examine the trends chronologically, we can see the decline of the
German right wing populist movement during the 50’s: the number of
CDU/CSU seats skyrockets, and this change seems to be primarily
associated with the decrease in the seats of the ‘Other’ parties
category (composed then of mostly of small right wing nationalist
parties at the time). Until the 80s, the distribution in the Bundestag
stays relatively stable. As the Greens and Die Linke (left-leaning and
left parties) enter the parliament, the main center-left party SPD’s
seats don’t seem to fall; in fact they rise, indicating a growth in
support for left leaning politics (Perhaps an obvious development
considering these changes took place after the German unification).
After the 2000s, though, we see the Greens and Die Linke continue to
grow progressively, eroding the SPD’s share of seats. Additionally, we
see the CDU/CSU retake its dominance (i.e., the Merkel years), but most
significantly to German politics, and even European politics, we see the
resurgence of right wing nationalist movements as AfD enters the
Bundestag in 2017. Since the AfD gained seats in the national
parliament, CDU/CSU seats have fallen, so we could infer that AfD
benefited from taking some of CSU’s voters.

### Composition of the Bundestag: Current vs Historical

![](Visualizing-_Bundestag_trends_files/figure-gfm/ggpol-fig1-1.png)<!-- -->

![](Visualizing-_Bundestag_trends_files/figure-gfm/ggpol-fig2-1.png)<!-- -->
<p>

  The first graph shows the composition of the Bundestag after the 2021
election, and the second one, shows what the composition of the
Bundestag looks like based on the average number of seats each party has
had since the 1949. I think these graphs are not necessarily the most
informative, since, for example, we cannot tell what the actual number
of seats each party has, and we could use other simpler graphs to convey
the information. However, I found this geom a little while ago and I
personally think it looks really cool and wanted to show it. Moreover,
by putting together the graph for the 2021 election and the seat
averages, I think the viewer is able to get a general sense of which
parties have dominated parliament and which parties have recently gained
more support - specifically, we can see the CDU/CSU and SPD have
dominated historically and other center as well as more radical parties
have appeared in recent years. Ultimately, this is not the most sound
graph, but I think it is visually appealing and I guess we don’t always
need to convey life changing insights in a graph. (I should add I am a
bit of a politics geek so perhaps these graphs are not as interesting to
others, but I digress)

## Source

Data retrieved from Germany’s Federal Returning Officer’s website -
[Bundeswahlleiter](https://www.bundeswahlleiter.de/en/bundeswahlleiter.html).
